Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined for a second time by Dr Gordon Ingram.
He is now senior lecturer in Psychology at RMIT
University Vietnam. And until recently, he was at the
Univers the, at the Universidad de Los Andes in
Colombia. And today we're focusing on his book, Adolescent
Use of New Media and internet Technologies, debating Risks
and opportunities in the digital age. And of course,
I'm leaving also the link to our first interview
on the show in the description. So Dr Ingram,
welcome back to the show. It's always a pleasure
to talk to you.
Thank, thank you Ricardo and thanks a lot for
the invitation and for having me back. It's a
great honor coming considering some of the names you've
had on the show. So, thanks a lot.
Yeah. No, it's uh totally my pleasure. And uh
in fact, when I, as I was saying off
record, when I got across your book, I was
really happy because I've been uh I've already had
uh actually a couple of conversations on the show
about some of these topics and people tend to
come from one extreme or the other when approaching
the potential psychological effects of new media, the internet
and other kinds of new technologies. And I think
that your book is very balanced uh what in
its approach. So te tell us actually about the
approach that you have in the book to studying
the effects or the potential effects of new media
and internet technologies and uh how it compares to
perhaps some of the more uh I don't know,
typical or mainstream approaches that we see that tend
to be based on moral panics, fear mongering and
stuff like that.
Ok. Well, I guess, um like uh as we
were talking in, in the previous interview, um which
I really enjoyed by the way and, and, and
thanks again for um doing the interview so well
that the first time I thought it was really,
really good. Uh But uh I always sort of
come at psychology from an evolutionary point of view.
So when you're looking at new technology, I think
it's natural to have the assumption that we evolved
in a different environment, you know, uh um uh
to be cosmides, talk about the environment of evolutionary
adaptive. This obviously, uh and this didn't include new
technology. So it doesn't seem, you know, coming at
it from that point of view, it doesn't seem
implausible that new technology could cause mental health problems.
The same way that say junk food, lack of
exercise causes us physical health problems. Uh And I
think maybe that causes me to take a different
point of view from some other social scientists who
might maybe start from a more blank slate point
of view. So they tend to think, well, if
Children grow up with new technology, this is what's
normal for them. And there's no reason why it
should be any more harmful than any other kind
of culture that, that Children grew up, grew up
on. So there's peop I think sometimes if you
take a blank state of view, you might be
quite skeptical of people who are suggesting special risks
of new technology and think, well, they're just engaging
in moral panic because the digital world is very
different, different to the world that they grew up
in. So it seems kind of unnatural and threatening
to them. But at the same time, I think
also I'm coming at it from the point of
view, you know, influenced by people like Joe Henry
K who, who see uh the human adaptation is
mostly about culture. So yeah, we are very flexible.
So there may be risks but not necessarily huge
risks. I think we're capable of adapting to new
technology just as we adapted to lots of other
cultural technologies over time.
And so why do you focus in the book
on adolescents specifically? I mean, is it just because
you tend to focus your research on adolescents or
is there any other special reason for focusing on
adolescents in this specific case and not, for example,
adults or Children.
Yeah. Um, WELL, I think, I mean, it, first
of all, it, it, it perhaps should emphasize that
new technology is not, not just about adolescence and
some, for some reason, they tend to kind of
bear the brunt of the, the moral panics and
so on or maybe go into that a bit
later. But, but, um, obviously all ages these days
are using technology and, you know, down from age
one really to, to, to age 90 or whatever,
everyone's using internet tech technology, right. Um, BUT I
think it's pretty clear that adolescents and young adults
maybe going up to, you know, the mid twenties
are really like the driving force in new technology
adoption because older people, we tend to have our
own set way of doing things. Um, WE do
adapt to new technology eventually, but it takes us
longer because of the kind of inertia of, of
different habits that we, we built up over our
lifespan. Uh, WHEREAS adolescents are going in with a,
with a more open mind, they're experimenting with everything
and, and they'll, they'll, you know, master this new
technology and adapt it to their own uses, uh
much more, much more easily. Uh And if you
compare them with younger Children, younger Children don't have
as much freedom to explore new technology, to use
it to develop new social relationships like teenagers do
so I think adolescents are kind of in that
sweet spot for, for a new technology uh adoption.
And then the second reason really is that adolescents
are uniquely vulnerable because they're kind of separating emotionally
from their families from the kind of dependence on
their families, they're developing their own identity in terms
of the brain, the brain is still going through
a lot of changes up until the mid twenties.
Um So this means that they're at a point
in life where they tend to suffer a lot
of psychosocial problems. Adolescents have the highest rates of
depression, anxiety, eating disorders, self-harm, delinquency, substance abuse, you
name it basically, almost any mental health problem or
behavioral problem. Adolescents have the kind of highest rates
of it. So um that means that they, if
there's any kind of effect of online actions on
these mental health problems, they'll probably be at their
most, the the strongest effects will really be an
adolescent. So for both, both those reasons, I think
it makes sense to focus on that age group.
So something that I mentioned in my first question
and you also talk about in your book is
or are moral panics? And I I guess it's
also interesting to address that here because uh your
book is not only focused on the potential psychological
effects that new media and internet technologies might have
on adolescent specifically, but also uh in understanding uh
why people approach this topic the way they do
usually. So to start off with, what is a
moral panic, what characterizes a moral panic? Well, it's
a concept
that really has been used more in sociology than
in psychology. Uh, AND there's an awful lot written
about moral panics and in sociology, it basically is
a concern about certain kinds of behavior in a
society, it tends to appear quite suddenly. So, you
know, it's a concern that wasn't there, you know,
the previous year or two years ago. Uh AND
it's shared across a broad section of society. So
it's not just religious fundamentalists or whatever, it's so
many groups of people are concerned about it. It's
not, doesn't tend to be based on hard evidence.
Um BUT more on anecdotes. So something like, you
know, say the concern about COVID-19 a couple of
years ago wouldn't count really as a moral panic
because there was a new disease there that was
actually killing people. So it's not just something that
people have, have kinda have kind of taken to
based on anecdotes. Um And finally, it tends to
disappear almost as quickly as it appeared. So a
good example would be, for example, in the nineties.
Um I remember there was a lot of panic
about new drugs like ecstasy, for example, young people
going out to raves, taking these drugs and maybe
dying from dehydration, that sort of thing. And so
there's a lot of media stories about this and
then a couple of years later, you know, it
just sort of became part of the accepted kind
of youth subculture that young people went out and
took these drugs and you didn't see the same
kind of media interest in it. So that was
a kind of often drugs like that are, are
kind of classic example of a moral panic that,
that takes hold
and why is it that moral panics so many
times focus on young people. Why young people specifically?
Well, I'm actually writing uh uh a theoretical article
about or trying to write a theoretical article about
that at the moment. So, um it's, it's, it's
very interesting, I think because if you look at
the sociologists, the sociological literature, they don't really tend
to focus much on the, the content of moral
panics. What they're interested in is the kind of
social reaction, you know, the politics behind it, the
different social groups, how they're, how they're, um, how
they're responding to the moral panic as it were.
Um And so what I was interested in when
I looked at different examples of moral panics was
that they nearly always seemed to concern young people
uh more than other groups of people and often
were to do with new technology, new cultural practices,
which explains why the moral panic just suddenly appears
out of nowhere because it's something that people weren't
really doing before. So I think what I try
to do in the, in the article is I'm
trying to look at it from a cultural evolutionary
point of view and say, um, young people are
the ones driving cultural change. And this is something
that can be maybe threatening to older generations. So
it's, it's often the older generations who are particularly
engaging in the panic. And I think there's a
sound reason for that, which is that older people
have adapted their behavior, adapted their practices to a
certain cultural environment. And then when they see young
people changing that environment, it's, there's a kind of
concern. Well, I taught my, my Children or we
taught the younger generation a certain set of skills,
these skills are not gonna be useless because everything
is changing. They're adopting these new uh ways which
are often associated with other social groups, uh you
know, other ethnic groups sometimes. So it's, it's something
which can be threatening in terms of, of feeling
that the skills that you taught your Children or
the younger generation are not going to be applicable
in the new digital world. So I think that,
and, and by the way, do you think that
could also apply to themselves? I mean, perhaps that
they themselves feel that they are no longer adapted
to the new world they're living
in. Well, I think it psychologically it's, it's definitely
probably generating some strong emotions. I think that explains
a lot, the emotional charge with, with the moral
panic is that it's all very strange, unfamiliar and
and there's something threatening about it. You know, I
think as humans, like I said, we, we evolved
to live in a cultural environment to identify with
the cultural practices of our kind of ethnic group.
And so when you, when you see these new
cultural practices coming in, maybe it, it can be
linked you a lot of moral panics can also
have to do with immigrants and, and, and it
can be, can be linked to this concern about
losing your own cultural practices, being replaced with another
group's cultural practices, which I think it makes sense.
We'd be a adapted to be concerned about that
really
and uh relevant to our conversation today. Why are
these moral panics so many times focused specifically on
new technologies or cultural practices?
Um But again, I, I think it's about cultural
change. So it's when there's something unfamiliar, it, it's
seen as kind of alien in some way, what's
new is also seen as somehow alien as different.
Uh And what you notice as well. Another thing
you notice with, with these things with, with these
panics about new technologies, it's not just about any
kind of technologies. It's there's often sort of recurring
themes in these moral panics. So things that really
activate strong emotions. So things like suicide, drugs, sexual
abuse, religious indoctrination, they're often sort of connected with
the use of, of new technology in some way.
Uh And it seemed, I think the idea is
that with this kind of these interactions that young
people are engaging in online, they're not as kind
of insulated from negative influences about these sorts of
behaviors that they would have been in the power
and the kind of idealized past that the older
generation is thinking of where the community kind of
had control of the younger people and protected them
to some extent from, from these kind of damaging
interactions. So I think that's driving a lot of
these concerns about new technology as well.
Uh And by the way, it is, of course,
uh doesn't apply only to newer technologies like we
have now the internet and so on, this is
a very, or seems to be a very old
phenomenon of older people reacting badly to new technology
because I've listened to podcasts and read books about,
since the 19 century people having bad reactions to
romance novels, mirrors teddy bears, cars, bicycles. I mean,
basically everything out there.
And yeah, that's a really good point and, and,
and that's, that kind of feeds the sort of
standard liberal dismissal of these fears. Oh, well, you
know, people have always been having moral panics. It's
just that you're stuck in your own ways and
stuff, but I'm not sure if it totally kind
of negates the, the, the, the problems of it
because, because I mean, one of the examples, uh
I think, I think Christopher Ferguson in, in one
of his articles, talks about this or, or his
book talks about, uh for example, the panic about
the uh Gutenberg printing press and when people could
print the Bible in German or French or whatever
language and every day people could read it. And
the Catholic establishment got very, very panicked by this.
But if you think about it, that that panic
wasn't entirely unreasonable because obviously the Gutenberg Grinding Press
led to the growth of protestantism. And, you know,
this everyday kind of engagement with religion that the
Catholics were really trying to, trying to get, trying
to stop, you know, they, they wanted to sort
of have a monopoly on, on religious practice. So
their fear in, in, in to some extent was,
was, was quite reasonable. And I think, um, as,
as scientists, we really need to think about, uh,
you know, are we just dismissing people's fears or
are we acknowledging that, that there is some kind
of reason why they, why, why they, why they
have problems with this, with these kind of changes
that, that technology is, is, is wreaking upon society?
And so what would you say would be a
proper scientific response to moral panics in society? Because
I guess that the two extreme responses would be
to just completely dismiss it because, oh, it's just
a moral panic. It doesn't matter or to sort
of jump on the bandwagon of the moral panic
and go ahead with it and, and basically say
that, oh, yeah, it is completely supported by the
scientific evidence, even if it is weak. Right? So
how should scientists react to them?
Yeah, I, I think you're totally right. The reaction
has been very polarized. Um I think there's also
sometimes a different stream discipline. So I get the
sense that in psychiatry, they're a bit more sympathetic
to the idea that new technology causes mental problems.
A lot of psychologists have been more skeptical. Uh
And so you can get a lot of criticism
kind of across disciplinary boundaries, which is interesting as
well. But, but you're right, there is um people
like J Twang, for example, in psychiatry is maybe
sometimes has been accused of, of cherry picking the
data, you know, focusing on the results of the
studies which show harm in ignoring the ones that
don't. Um On the other hand, you have people
in psychology like Chris Ferguson, Linda Kay who basically
are almost uh reading between the lines, almost accusing
um people like twang who are, who are proposing
a danger um at or, or um or um
uh it's getting the name that's Bradman, I think
is another one in, in, in the US. But
they uh they are accusing them of, of basically
almost, you know, making up the, the risk to
or emphasizing exaggerating the risk to, to sell books.
And I, I think essentially, and I think this
is, you know, I, I think there's room to,
to acknowledge that probably both sides are, are acting
in good faith and, and are just seeing kind
of different aspects of the picture. Uh And we
can be a bit more reasonable and just look
at the evidence and take a more evidence based
approach, acknowledge that there may be certain risks. Uh
BUT probably in the public mind, they have become
a bit exaggerated because of the tendency to moral
panic uh that I mentioned, but we can't just
dismiss these, uh, these moral panics. I think sometimes
the term moral panic is, is used as a
way to shut down debate and just, uh, you
know, you're being unreasonable, you're engaging in moral panic.
And it's not acknowledging that people do have certain
fears which are quite reasonable given our evolutionary history
as cultural animals, as I tried to explain in
the, in the previous, the previous ones.
Yeah. Actually, one of the reactions I tend to
like the most are from people like Stuart Rie
and other Zoo. For example, when it comes to
the potential psychological effects of Instagram and social media
on adolescents and particularly girls, I mean, they've looked
at the evidence and when they write articles about
it, uh, usually the conclusion they write there is
that we're not, I mean, it's sort of a
mixed bag, but the evidence in favor of them
of there really being negative psychological effects tends to
be weak but we're not sure. I mean, the,
the moral panic probably is not warranted, but at
this point we can't really say much about it.
Well, that, that's
what, um, it, it's one thing that interests me
is that often people like that are, are much
more reasonable in the published articles than if you
actually follow them on Twitter and, and things like
that. They can be a bit more, a bit
more kind of nasty in, in what they say
in, in social media, which is interesting in itself,
you know, maybe it's just a kind of off
the cuff response. They're not putting as much thought
into it as, as when they write an academic
article. But you do see some statements basically sort
of saying, oh, this is all a myth and,
well, actually, you know, the, the there is some
kind of evidence that kind of indicates that there
are some risks. You can't just say that there's
no evidence at all, but they, they do in
some of the less kind of guarded statements you
will, you will find people, uh, especially, uh, someone
like Chris Ferguson is very kind of competent on,
on Twitter will, will, will say a lot of,
uh, a lot of quite strong things on there.
No. Yeah, I've read Doctor Ferguson on the show
and these very feisty words. So, uh, we'll, we'll
get more into the social media stuff later on.
But, uh, just before we get into the specific
topics that you explore in the book, you focus
broadly on three different types of risk, young people's
identity, the types of content that uh they access
and social relationships. So why did you pick these
three specifically? Um I guess I
basically, they, they come when I was thinking of
a way to kind of structure the different types
of risks, I guess I was thinking about uh
maybe the kind of level of of interaction involved
uh the kind of different types of social interaction
really. So the first one I saw was a
kind of cultural identity. So um for example, indoctrinate,
if you think of like indoctrination into a certain
group kind of behavior. So obviously an obvious example
would be like political or religious radicalization. But also
if you think about the availability, for example of
um kind of different cultural subcultural groups. So groups
where they kind of advocate suicide that you do
unfortunately get group groups where people kind of give
tips for suicide and this sort of thing or
even like pro self harm uh or uh pro
anorexia. So these sort of things where uh the
the online experience kind of facilitates someone kind of
choosing a certain kind of identity, which could actually
be quite damaging to them. Uh Secondly, just in
terms of passive consumption of content, so uh things
like uh violent video games, they might have damaging
effects, uh pornography, particularly extreme pornography, obviously could have
certain damaging effects without any kind of social interaction.
It's simply through consuming content. And then finally, the
level of kind of interpersonal interaction where the online
media might facilitate some forms of exploitation. And there's
lots of different forms of of exploitation, even kind
of economic exploitation sometimes. But I guess the classic
examples would be like cyber bullying or online sexual
abuse. So basically those kind of three levels of
kind of community or cultural identity, passive consumption of
content or or interpersonal one on one kind of
interaction,
cyber bullying, by the way, is something that we
talked about in our first interview. So for the
audience, if you're interested, please go and watch that
one. Uh So let's start then here in terms
of the topics with self-concept and self-esteem in Netherlands.
So uh first of all, uh tell us a
little bit about what these terms mean and then
how do they play out online?
Well, that's a great question and um self concept
is basically basically kind of identity. So it's like
kind of what kind of person do you see
yourself as? And it gets into, you know, it
kind of links both personality, you know, what, what,
how you sort of see your own behavior, how
you see other people perceiving you and also you
maybe kind of subculture cultural identity. So whether someone's
a goth or a, a jock or a nerd,
you know, it's kind of so the high school
subculture kind of things um and self esteem, I
think is most people understand. But self esteem is,
is kind of whether you see how, how, whether
you uh see other people viewing you positively or
negatively. So both of them are kind of linked
with how you think of other people perceiving you.
And this is something that's quite new in adolescence.
Basically, young Children have the the great luxury of
not, not having to think very much about what
other people are thinking about them, right? But then
eventually you start thinking, hm, actually, you know, that
person has a certain image of me and it's
positive or negative. And when you start having to
do that over and over again, for all the
people around you, it can, it can get quite
overwhelming obviously for adolescents, it's quite new to them.
But
basically you get that sort of an age where
you notice that reputation matters.
Exactly. Exactly. And, and again, that's, um, that's, uh,
that's very uh adaptive and, and I think we
talked about that in the last interview as well.
It's something that's unique to humans, really this kind
of this kind of consciousness of their reputation in
the whole social group. Um And pro probably had,
you know, important uh inhibit inhibitory effects on, on,
on our behavior um in terms of the effects
of the online environment on this. Um I think
it's, it's a very good question and, and this
is why I get a bit, ok, there are
people exaggerating the risks. It's true. But I also
get a bit a bit frustrated with people just
dismissing the risks out of hand because we really
don't know as, as you said about Stuart Ritchie
concluding in his articles, we just don't have enough
evidence now to be really sure about the answer
and probably it is gonna have profound effects, not
necessarily damaging effects, but profound effects on how we
conceive of, of our self concept or self esteem,
et cetera. So if you look at adolescents, they're
obviously in a sensitive period, they're going through massive
changes in the self concept, the self esteem, they
tend to suffer actually from a kind of cognitive
illusion where they overestimate. Uh BECAUSE this, this is
kind of a common kind of cognitive bias, right?
When, when something is new to you, you, you
think about it too much. So because they've gone
from not thinking at all about how other people
are, how much other people are thinking about them,
they tend to go too much in the other
direction and think that other people are thinking about
them all the time. Whereas obviously they're not, I
mean, their parents are are thinking about their kids,
but most of the time, you know, they're, they're
thinking about their job or, you know, other things
as well. They're not just thinking about the kids
all the time and that's even more true, obviously,
for, for people who aren't related to them. So
you know, they, they're, they're friends also have other
friends. They're not just thinking about one friend all
the time. They're not necessarily offended by something they've
done, et cetera, et cetera. And so they, adolescents
can get overly self conscious because they suffer from
this illusion that other people are always judging, always
observing the behavior, always analyzing their behavior when really
they aren't, you know, devoting so much time for
it.
That sounds very similar to the spotlight effect. Right.
Yeah, I think it's a, it's a, it's a
kind of version of that. Yeah, it is. But
it's particularly, um, there is a term for it
in, in adolescence as well, which I've momentarily forgotten
but it is in, it is in the book,
if you, if you look it up. So, um,
they, uh, they basically have this kind of bias
towards, towards sort of feeling themselves more observed than
they actually are. Uh, AND I think it's interesting
to think about how that will interact with online
interactions because it does kind of give you maybe
a biased view as well, but it can maybe
give you kind of more information about how other
people are actually judging you. So if you're constantly
posting photos saying different things, you can sort of
see how people are reacting to you and it's
not all sort of just left in people's heads
and in ephemeral verbal conversations, you can actually think
about it and sort of judge the reaction that
your your actions are having on, on other people.
So I think this will give in some ways.
I think it it could actually be positive. It
could help adolescents to get more socially mature and
and understand the effects of their actions and their
image presentation as on other people. But also in
certain individuals, it could be problematic because if they're
very sensitive, they could take certain kinds of reactions
quite badly online.
And are there any important gender differences in online
identity?
Oh for sure. Um Remember though um the all
gender differences are are statistical rather than absolute because
I think there's a tendency uh you know, the
people outside academic circles can interpret, interpret differences between
girls and boys in essentialist kind of ways as
if so. So I'm not saying here that all
girls are one way and all boys another
way. Yeah, I mean, we have to keep in
mind that these are always average differences and there's
lots of overwhelm.
Yeah. And I know you know that but just
in, in terms of one set of viewers to
to get the the wrong impression of what I'm
saying. But sure, but I think generally we can
look at some general statistical differences. So girls tend
to spend more time over uh interacting over pure
social networks like uh Instagram, Snapchat, et cetera. Boys
can still have a lot of social interaction online
but relatively will be more through the medium of
gaming. And of course, there are plenty of girls
who enjoy gaming as well. But in terms of
statistical differences, boys will be more through gaming. Uh
GIRLS more through sort of pure social networks and,
and girls tend to emphasize visual self pre presentation
more while boys focus on their accomplishments, competing in
things like games, et cetera. Uh YOU can see
this very clearly in the, in the, in the
case of online dating as well. Kind of um
when we get on to maybe talk a bit
about online dating later,
which actually follows the lines of what would be
predicted by evolutionary theory,
right. Yeah, this kind of uh I think this
is one area where the evolutionary predictions have been
quite well borne out. So there's uh um uh
uh some uh some study by Frank mcandrew, for
example, for an early study of Facebook use where
they made some pretty clearly pretty good evolutionary driven
hypotheses and found some pretty solid evidence that girls
and boys were using Facebook in very, in very
different ways. And I think it also explains the
the the the kind of visual presentation in girls
and their dominance in this sort of pure social
network space. Kind of explains maybe as well why
Instagram has become more popular than Facebook uh among
young people? Because if you look at Instagram, the
image is very much the kind of center of
it there is text there and it, you know,
the textural interaction can be very important on Instagram
as well, but it's like it's secondary to the
presentation of the image. And I think that makes
suits girls better than the kind of more text
driven uh interface that, that Facebook.
Yeah, those long written essays or texts or texts
is something that you would find more on Facebook.
Yeah,
exactly. Exactly. Um MEANWHILE, with, if you look at
games, what are the kind of most popular games
these days, there's been an evolution in the sort
of games that boys are playing. They tend to
be things like for Fortnite or Valorant, which are
very kind of social experiences, but they're different kind
of social experience than a social network because they're
more team based. So it's more that you're kind
of cooperating with other people competing against other teams.
So you are learning social skills, you're engaging in
social interaction. But it's always for the purpose of
getting achievements in the game, which is very different
from how girls are interacting online.
We'll talk more about gaming uh in a bit.
But another problem or worry that many people have
has to do with screen time. And I guess
that in this particular case, people also worry about
scree screen time when it comes to infants and
young Children. But here we're focusing on adolescents. So
do we know if screen time really has any
relationship with well-being? Does it have an impact on
well-being.
Well, there's been an awful lot of debate about
this as you probably, you probably know. And the
consensus is that any effects are, are pretty small.
So there's one area where there does seem to
be more moral panic than is really warranted by
the data. Um, AND, and I think most, almost
everyone would agree these days that it doesn't make
much sense to focus on screen time in the
absolute, there was like an American Society of psychiatrists
that used to recommend uh um a two plus
two rule, you know, sort of two hours a
day and then incrementing that for each age or
something like that from two years of age. But
they kind of abandoned that sort of thing now
because they recognize, you know, if you're doing, say
a zoom call with your grandparents, if the child's
doing a zoom call with their grandparents, you don't
really have to worry about how much time they're
spending. Zoom calling their grandparents. You know, this is
pretty clearly a positive social interaction. So, um I
think it very much the focus is now much
more on what, what Children are doing with their
time online. Um, OBVIOUSLY there are extremes. So if
a teenager is spending 18 or 20 hours a
day on that, and there are teenagers who spend
18 or 20 hours a day online. Unfortunately, this,
this is, this is a thing. It's hard to
see how that can be good. For them really
because you know, it's obviously going to interfere with
sleeping, eating and bathing, et cetera. So then they're
not really doing enough things off outside the screen
time that they should be doing. But likewise, we
have to look at the other extreme as well,
someone's spending and, and often people have found this
kind of U shaped curve where you find negative
effects for both, for both ends. And if someone's
spending zero hours online, what you get is, is
this person, how is this gonna person gonna be
seen by other kids? The this teenager, you know,
they're not gonna have the same cultural references, they're
not gonna be able to interact, they're gonna be
missing out on a lot of the online interactions
that, that the other teams are, are engaging in.
So that's not gonna be very good for them,
good for them either. So, uh I think the
extremes tend to be, tend to be quite bad,
but in the middle, it's not so much how
much time they're spending online as whether they're engaging
in positive activities and whether they also have positive
activities outside of, of screen time. So whether they're
also doing exercise, meeting up with friends, you know,
uh going to, to see music or, or, or,
or other cultural community activities. And if they're still
getting plenty of those opportunities, I don't think it
really matters a great deal whether they're spending, you
know, 10 hours a week or 20 hours a
week online. It's, it's just kind of lost in
the, in the noise room. Yeah.
So another thing that we've already touched on a
little bit earlier. And actually this is very interesting
because back in September, October 2021 there was a
data leak from Instagram that even again people like
Stuart Ritchie wrote about and what he said back
then I remember it was something along the lines
of, oh yeah, we can't really tell from these
data that there's any negative psychological effects of Instagram
on girls specifically. But what do we know about
the effects of Instagram use on body image? And
I guess in this case, it would apply mostly
to girls so
well that that's something I might, I might take
issue with actually. And, and I think, I think
there's been a lot of focus on girls um
which is interesting, you have to think culturally why
has there been this this this kind of focus
on on girls? Maybe because like I was saying,
we know that girls tend to present themselves more,
more visually. So it seems natural that there might
be a special effect on on girls. But actually,
there has been a ton of study on a
ton of studies on Instagram and body image in
the last few years. And yet we still don't
seem to know very much there isn't you, you
look at the evidence, it's kind of like, like
like Richie says, it's kind of like me basically
this, there's not much, there's not much there. Um
And again, I think it's because there's so many
different ways of using Instagram basically. So if a
teenage girl is sort of doom scrolling as, as
we say, you know, through, through pictures of skinny
models, you know, interacting very passively and just thinking,
oh, you know, I'm so fat compared to, compared
to these girls that I see online clearly, that
can be a negative experience for her. But then
there are also plenty of people using Instagram. Um
YOU must have heard the term fits. So when
people are following people to get exercise tips or
diet tips, uh and they're also using it as
motivation. So they're seeing people that they respect who
are going out and exercising early in the morning
thinking actually, you know, I should do that that's
working for them. I should do that as well.
So it can be like a really strong motivation
to, to, to get this visual evidence that people
are actually engaging in this behavior. So it very
much depends on the person and how they're using
uh Instagram as to whether they're using it positively
or negatively. And it's very hard to get at
this quantitatively. Maybe with qualitative studies, you can say
this is working for people. This this aspect is
problematic, but it's very hard to scale that up
to a proper quantitative study. And, and really sort
of see what's positive for people, what's negative for
people and going back to the to the gender
issues. Um What you notice is, is a lot
of the, the early studies on Instagram only included
female participants. They, they actually just didn't bother looking
at, at males. Since then. There have been some
other studies with men finding that they actually share
a lot of the can share a lot of
the same problems positively with, with body image that,
that, that they actually it can make them less
satisfied with their own body if they, if they're
constantly being exposed to, to kind of alpha male,
both sort of figures online. And um when you
look at studies that most of the studies that
I've seen that compared including a couple of my
own students who, who did um studies of Instagram
use in Colombia. And when there basically weren't any
gender effects, I mean, and, and a lot of
published studies are the same that you don't see
that girls are necessarily more con concerned about their
body image uh than men are uh in relation
to Instagram use. So um I think it is
kind of culture bias to think this is particularly
damaging to girls, which may maybe it isn't necessarily
the case.
Yeah. And, and actually that's a very interesting point
because uh I mean, if we look across the
internet, uh it's also very frequent for us to
see uh I mean, content targeting men and, uh,
uh, I, I mean, pictures of blood. Yeah. And,
and things related to levels of muscle mass and
all of that. So, yeah, I mean, it would
be at least intuitive to, to a certain extent,
to expect that at least certain men would perhaps
feel more insecure with their bodies if they think
that those bodies that they see on Instagram or
elsewhere would be the ideal or the ones that
women or girls tend
to are attracted to. Exactly. Yeah. And um and
maybe it wasn't something that they thought very much
about, you know, girls were already thinking a lot
about their body image but men before it became
so kind of in their face with Instagram maybe
weren't thinking about it. So, so that could be
a problem as well.
So another thing that people have been worrying a
lot about and going back to Jin Twenge and
I guess Jonathan Haidt as well has to do
with the impacts of social media on self esteem
and depression and, and also on the extreme end
uh se side. So what do we know about
it at this moment? I mean, sh should we
really worry that much about the potential negative psychological
effects that social media might have, particularly when it
comes to these issues, depression suicide and so on?
Well, I think that there's some really elegant series
in that area. I remember some years ago, my
friend uh Charlotte, please published a really great evolutionary
hypothesis about social media use and depression and, and
how depression might be linked to negative social comparison.
So it, it, it makes a lot of sense
theoretically. But when you actually look at the data,
it's not that there isn't that much data to
support it. Again, it it seems to be this
kind of U shaped thing and that the extremes
might be particularly bad. But if you're saying is
spending say seven hours a week on social media
versus 14 hours a week, you know, both are
kind of in the normal range generally. What's bad
for mental health is doing things which are outside
of the normal range of behavior. So as long
as you're kind of keeping things fairly normal living
a a fairly normal life, you probably aren't gonna
have too many, too many mental health problems as
well. The psycho that I read that most of
the psycho psychological evidence in that area anyway. So
I think um even with the extremes, the problem
is as well that there isn't necessarily causal evidence.
So people tend to report a correlation as if
it was evidence for a causal effect of social
media use. But in fact, of course, it could
be the other way around. It could be that
the fact that someone is already starting to have
mental health problems is what causes them to use
social media in a in a very extreme sort
of way. So for me, I, I tend to
take a very pragmatic approach to, to academia these
days. And it, it ii, I would prefer to
kind of almost forget about the causal question because
I don't think we're ever going to work out
the causality in a way that everyone's happy and
everyone is satisfied about it and everyone agrees on
it. So I would kind of tend to say,
well, it is important to look at how someone's
using the internet. But the extreme forms of internet
use might be more useful as a kind of
warning sign that someone could be having or about
to have some sort of mental health problems. So
if you, if you find, for example, I know
certain people like they're always kind of, you know,
you message them and they respond instantly or you,
you leave a Facebook comment and, and they're instantly
kind of responding to it and you think you
could think, you know, why is that, why is
that person, you know, so kind of plugged in
online that they're, they may be a bit obsessive
about instantly responding when looking at the phone, constantly
checking the phone that the um the kind of
nomo phobias, it's called the smartphone addiction. Yeah. And
maybe that's indicative of, of something they're kind of
trying to escape from in the, in the offline
world. Maybe they're not as, as kind of immersed
as they should be always in, in their interactions
with the people around them in the offline world.
So that could be something that, that's kind of
a sign of a sign of risk in their,
in their offline social interactions. But then conversely, if
someone is using social media a lot and then
one day and I've seen people do this as
well. There's a, I'm leaving Facebook, you know, I've
had enough of Twitter and I'm just going and,
and that's actually been a big part of their
life and then they just suddenly just cut that
off. I mean, I don't nothing wrong with, you
know, decreasing your use over time. But may, maybe
it's a bit of a warning sign if someone
is just going to zero social media use as
well and maybe that it would be a good
idea to reach out to that person, maybe make
a phone call to them a few days later
and just kind of check that they're, they're feeling
ok and that sort of thing, you know, because
so I think I would prefer to see these
kind of extremes of internet use it not as
so much in causal terms and more kind of
possible indicators or warning signs that, that, that something
might be wrong there. Did you see what I
mean?
No. And I mean, here I'm just going to
comment uh to make a comment because, uh, it
bothers me quite a bit when people focus solely
on social media and are a little bit obsessed
about it when it comes to the rising rates
of depression and suicide among young people. Because, I
mean, aren't there other alternative or competing hypothesis to
consider here? Like, for example, the social economic, political
context that we're living in, I mean, the future
is very uncertain. We've had economic crisis. Uh uh
I mean, jobs are less secure. So I, I
mean, I guess that there would be other factors
to consider here. You totally
anticipated what I was about to say though, actually
about, about suicide in, in particular. Um YOU know,
a lot of the discussion about suicide tends to
be anecdotal. Uh YOU know, say someone was on
a, an online group discussing suicide and then killed
themselves or someone was being cyberbullied and then killed
themselves. The problem is you don't, you don't know,
it's impossible to know for sure that that person
wouldn't have killed themselves if, if they hadn't been
engaging in those, in those online activities. And when
you look at the quantitative data, um exactly what
you were saying, there's social and economic factors, particularly
the economy, there seems to be a much stronger
link between levels of suicide and whether the economy
is doing well or doing badly than with the
introduction of social media. Um There's much, much clearer
signal in, in the data, I think for the,
for the effect. So you could say, if you
really want to do something about suicides don't go
attacking social networks, focus on, on getting the economy
better or maybe making more opportunities because young people
are always saying, you know, and, and, and it's
very true that the, the opportunities for, for work
and for security in the, in the labor market
aren't there that, that, that we're there uh in
their parents' time or their grandparents time. So maybe
we should be to, to really combat suicide. We
should be focusing on creating those kind of opportunities
and giving young people a sense of a, a
productive future that they can have rather than rather
than focusing on social networks.
So uh another topic then is there such a
thing as internet addiction? I mean, and if there
is what would be the criteria here to classify,
be a particular behavior as internet addiction,
I think that this is very um kind of
controversial idea and that there's been controversy about being
included in the World Health Organization, uh manual, you
know, disorders. Um I personally think that the concept
makes sense. It does exist, but a lot of
people are, are really implacably opposed to the, the
very concept of the behavioral addiction. They want to
reserve the term basically for substance, substance addictions. Um
And I don't think we, we're gonna resolve that
debate anytime, anytime soon. I think people are very
kind entrenched in those positions, but I think both
both sides would agree that it's not just about
how much time, you know, again thinking of screen
time, addiction isn't just about how much time that
you spend online. Um It's, it's more about whether
it's interfering with other aspects of your life uh
and how good or bad you feel about the
activity. The problem is that when people are measuring
uh you know, the negative effects, they tend to
focus on the time and not whether someone is,
is using the internet in, in problematic ways, which
might be a better indicator really of, of, of,
you know, potential negative effects. So for example, if
you think of um something which is pretty controversial,
whether someone can be addicted to online porn, it
probably depends a lot on the kind of social
context. Right? In fact, there's uh uh some studies
have shown, um, it's someone's religious from a religious,
strongly religious upbringing. It's more damaging for them to
use online porn than, than someone who's not from
a religious background.
So, and actually, actually that bit, I've had an
interview two years ago with Doctor Nicole Rosi and
she has done work on that and at least
according to her work and her conclusions, it seems
that it, it is tied a lot to moral
considerations, right? And mo most people who present themselves
or claim that they are foreign ethics that are
religious. So,
uh and they may even have issues with, you
know, masturbation and that sort of thing because it's
because they see it as a kind of something
that, that is prohibited in the Bible or whatever.
So, um, I think that kind of context and
also, you know, you got to look at whether
someone's married or not. For example, if someone is
using porn, only a couple of nights a week,
but it's when the wife has gone to bed
and so they're losing sleep because of it. They're
feeling guilty because of it. They may have more
negative effects from that than a single guy who's
just using it in the early evening when he
comes home from work. And it's just a kind
of way of relaxing after work. You know what
I mean? So it's, you've got to look at
the social context and it's not just about how
much, you know, how many hours someone is engaging
in a certain social activity, it's about whether they
feel a compulsion to do it, whether they feel
that it's interfering with other aspects of their life.
And, and I think everyone can agree that that's
the kind of the damaging aspect of it, whether
or not we call it addiction. It's whether someone
is, feels that it's having negative effects on their
life or whether no, it's just something I do
to, to relax and I'm not really worried about
it, that, that really makes it damaging or not.
Uh But uh if it's the case that many
people who say that they suffer from porn addiction
are religious, I mean, would we then conclude that
the problem there is the access to the program
gray or the religious beca because, I mean, of
course, it's affecting their lives, it's affecting their mental
well being. But wouldn't we say then that it's
mostly because of them having those moral values or?
Well, I don't think it's, it does, um, come
play a part in, in the propensity to see.
But I don't think it's necessary, you know, it's
necessary to be religious to, to have problems with
addict. And you could also look at, say gambling
addiction, you'd probably find kind of similar phenomenon there.
It might be more common for religious people to
say they have, they have an issue with that.
But I think it means you've got to look
at the whole social context when you're treating someone
right. And not just say you can't just sort
of have a cut off and it's amazing how
many empirical studies will have a cut off of
a number. Oh, if they're doing this activity more
than three hours per day, it's, it's problematic then.
No, it, it's, you got to look at the,
the social context and that the person is in
to say whether the, the addiction is something that's
going to be problematic for them or not. And
I think really we need to listen to people
more who are actually engaging in the activities and,
and take a more, um, a less kind of
number crunchy approach and more kind of pragmatic, you
know, what are the problems that this person is,
is facing in this situation?
So, let's talk a little bit about gaming here,
uh particularly online social gaming and the social bit
here is very important because there are games that
we play alone. So I guess the effects here
wouldn't be the same. So, but when it comes
to online social gaming, what do you think are
the most interesting psychological aspects to uh explore here?
Well, I think that would, that would probably be
an interview. So there's so much you can look
at. Um ONE of the things we've looked at
a lot is prestige. So the the, you know,
the importance of with, with some of my students
at Los Angeles, we looked at the prestige and
online gaming and you know how uh boys in
particular might be kind of driven to by evolutionary
pressures to kind of have this competition for prestige,
which explains a lot of the, the sort of
behavior in the games. Um But I think for
me that if I could pick one thing to
investigate, it would be gender, probably because uh I
think that the special identity of female gamers is
really interesting because it's something that's becoming much more
common. If you remember back to the eighties and
nineties gaming was seen as something very male, a
very male activity. It still is probably a little
more male than female. But I think females make
up something like 40% of, of committed gamers. Now.
It's becoming much more, uh, much more common for
women and girls to, to engage in. So I
think it would be really interesting to see how
they navigate being a female gamer. Do they? We've
seen evidence for my students that they do suffer
discrimination. Men still make comments about, go, you know,
oh, they're, they're only good for playing a healer,
that sort of thing. They're not, they're not good
as a fighter. So you do, you do see
quite a lot of sexism still? So it would
be interesting to see how they, how they kind
of deal with discrimination and what they get out
of gaming. Do they get the same things that,
that males get out of gaming or are they
getting something different out of gaming? Uh And why
is it such an important part of their identity?
You know, how do they, they kind of navigate
that identity? So, shout out to any uh potential
uh postgraduate students if you want to, if you
want to come and work with me on, on
that topic, I'd be really fascinated to do kind
of mixed method study of female gamers. And it
would be really, really cool.
And so just to tackle another moral panic, what
about violent video games? Do they really lead to
any sort of violent behavior? Or is there not
enough evidence to support that.
Well, I think II I spent quite a lot
of time that in the book and I genuinely
came at it with an open mind and because
it was, you know, as I say, the, the
positions were so polarized, it was hard to, to
see, you know, straight off with who was right.
But, um it does, after reviewing all the evidence
of over, you know, decades of analysis of this
question, it does seem like a fairly clear cut
example of a, of a moral panic. I think
so. And it is something which has gone down
over time, you know. So back in with Columbine
in the nineties, people were taking quite seriously the
idea that video games were causing these shootings. It
does seem to have kind of fallen out of
the discourse a bit these days. And I think
Ferguson in particular is very convincing, sing on this.
He's basically pretty much devoted most of his, his
career to debunking us.
By the way, when it came to Columbine, there
were, there were also people who said that the
culprit was, uh, Marilyn Manson and violent.
Yeah. Yeah, I was thinking that when you said
as well about other moral panics in history, you
know, there's a lot of history of rock music,
rap music as well. You know, people say, oh,
this is gonna, is going to corrupt the minds
of our youth and so on. But, um, but,
uh, I think that the most, the most convincing
piece of evidence for me was, uh, the, the
overall rates of, of aggression and violent behavior in
society. If you look at the last 30 years,
they've basically gone on quite a steep decline, at
least in, in developed societies. And it's, it's, it's
hard to square that with the, obviously the huge
growth in popularity in violent games. You know, if
they really were making people more violent, wouldn't we
have seen exactly the opposite that, that rates of
interpersonal aggression would have gone up. So if anything,
they may, it, it more tends to support the
kind of the, the opposite theory, which is that
there can be an outlet for aggression and actually
people can work off the the frustrations on these
games instead of being aggressive in interpersonal ways. Uh
And I think that another convincing piece of data
is uh Ferguson's analysis of, of mass shooters where
he shows that actually, um although some of them
played, uh uh you know, uh first person shooter
video games, this is if anything lower than the
rate in the general population. So again, that supports
the theory that no, maybe that these things are
actually if anything helping people deal with their aggression
and not, and, and it's the people who, who
avoid them, who may actually uh in some cases
are more problems. So, um I think the only
way that it, it's plausible that they may have
an effect is perhaps by improving the accuracy. So,
if people have that should be nothing because it's
quite serious. But if, if people have been, uh,
uh, practicing a lot of first person shooter games,
if they're in an actual mass shooting situation, they
may actually kill more people because they're just used
to, more used to, to pressing the trigger, aiming
and firing. But that doesn't really seem worth kind
of focusing legislation on in, in contrast with maybe
restricting the availability of, of, of weapons to people
who are mentally unstable and that sort of thing.
Yeah. Uh So we've already touched a little bit
on pornography earlier, but apart from the addiction side
of things, what about some of its other supposed
harmful effects on people's sexual lives? I mean, does
it have any or
again another controversial subject? Uh And one that's difficult
to, there's a lot of people arguing very, very
different things. Uh And the other great difficulty with
investigating pornography, particularly with adolescence is it's there's a
real lack of studies on it. Um PARTICULARLY with
underage people because there are obviously ethical, huge ethical
difficulties with doing. So there's some questionnaire based studies.
But when at the level of, you know, in
depth interviews or, and especially experimental studies, I mean,
it basically just can't, there's no way in an
experimental situation that you can show pornographic material to
a minor even though that we know that most
particularly underage males most underage males above about 14
years of age are watching pornography all the time,
but you can't actually study the effects of it
in a lab. So that does lead to huge
kind of evidence. Uh, EVIDENCE gap really. Um, I
think there are some legitimate concerns there. Um, THERE'S
not a huge, uh, as with screen time and,
and violent video games, there's not really much evidence
or depression as well. There's not really much evidence
that, you know, say watching a certain number of
hours per week, more than another person really uh
affects your sex life or anything else in, in
any other way. I I think one of the
concerns with adolescents in particular is though, is that
they might be getting a lot of their sexual
education basically from porn, which obviously is a concern
because porn is not particularly realistic in his depiction
of real sexual relationships. So there is some evidence
from positive studies that they may uh that young
boys or adolescent boys may be pressuring sexual partners
into repeating certain things that they've seen online. And
this obviously can be quite distressing for the girls
and lead to frustrations in the relationship. And it's
not a particularly positive thing in terms of their,
in terms of their sort of learning romantic relationships
and so on. So I think that is a
genuine extent. I don't think we should sort of
dismiss that concern out of hand because it's very,
it because of it, because of the ethical problems,
it's impossible to show that that doesn't have harmful
effects. Right. So we can't be sure that it
doesn't have harmful effects. So I don't think we
should just dismiss that sort of concern, but in
terms of things like, uh, you know, more severe
problems like sexual assault, there isn't really any hard
evidence that, um, most porn use will affect rates
of sexual assault, which is sometimes, you know, kind
of a criticism of fem of some feminists, not
all feminists, but that some feminists will make of
a p some feminists are actually quite prop use,
but some will make the criticism that, you know,
it could, it could lead to more sexual violence,
more sexual assault. There isn't much evidence for that
except in some studies, I did notice when they
focused on violent porn use, they did seem in
some of the meta analysis when they kind of
controlled for that. It did seem that that might
be again, maybe not causal but maybe a warning
sign. Uh IF someone is, is watching a lot
of of violent porn that they may be a
possible possible offender.
So if I remember correctly in the conversation I
had with Doctor Nicole Rosy again. Um I think
that when I asked her if porn could have
any harmful psychological effects or harm relationship specifically. And
here we're focusing mostly on heterosexual relationships. She said
that it could have a negative effects in the
sense that if the, if, for example, the, the
man is watching pornography and then, uh, his partner
knows, then the woman might get a little bit
insecure because of the, let's say the kinds of
women, uh, the, the, uh, her partner is exposed
to. So, I mean, she might get in insecure
because she doesn't look like them, she doesn't perform
like them and stuff like that. So that's something
that she mentioned
or even see it as cheating. I'm sure some
women um do do see it as a kind
of as a kind of cheating uh or some
men. That's why I think as well that um
it's not only with religious people that you might
get uh kind of kind of negative feelings about
porn news because you could have someone who feels
like, you know, compelled to watch porn, but at
the same time, they feel like they're kind of
cheating on their partner by doing it. So I
think you need, you do need to look at
the complexity of the, of the social relationship. On
the other hand, you do get couples um who
will watch porn together and enjoy it. So it,
it does very much depend on the, on the,
on the social context and that's why it's difficult
to really find patterns in the quantitative data because
you're kind of averaging a whole lot of positive,
negative, neutral situations and there's, there's just not much
signal in the data.
So one thing also that I would like to
ask you about is uh privacy. Of course, this
is something that, for example, people work in the
ethics of technology, talk a lot about. But that's
from a philosophical perspective, but from a more psychological
perspective, are there risks to privacy associated with content
sharing?
Um I think obviously there, there are a lot
of risks. Um And there's a lot been written
about them. Uh The one in terms of, of
picking out one of the things that really stood
out to me when it was, when I was
doing a lot of reading for the, for the
book. Uh And I remember it is kind of
one of the most kind of distressing things I
was reading about uh in connection with privacy in
particular was uh revenge porn. So there are some
really horrifying stories um of, of, you know, women
who, who'd had stuff shared, including by, you know,
their current husband and, and, and this sort of
thing. So it really brought home that a lot
of the debate about privacy and people being exploited
online through having open privacy and this sort of
thing. It, it's kind of missing the point, which
is a lot of this online abuse is, is
by uh people who, who know you, right? So,
uh es especially in the, in the case of
women, it tends to be by ex-partners or even
current partners Uh and so to me, I, I
would tend to, to actually, I think there's a
lot being written about privacy. I think teens and
young people these days are actually very conscious of
privacy. They kind of grow up like it. Like
we were saying, at the start, they're very concerned
naturally about their reputation. So they very quickly learn
and, you know, they're very savvy about the controls
and things. They very quickly learn how to restrict
content to certain people and so on. Um I
would, I would say that we should focus more
on abuse by, you know, within social relationships and
really, you know, criminalize more that kind of online
abuse, you know, sharing images without someone's consent, uh
you know, very delicate, uh very sensitive images without
someone, someone's consent is something that has been criminalized
in certain jurisdictions, but it's still very piecemeal in,
in terms of, of where it's illegal, where not.
Uh And I think we really need to reach
more in, in international standards on, on dealing with
that as a, as a kind of crime, almost
equivalent to in-person sexual abuse.
Yeah, when it comes to the criminology side of
things, that's actually a recurrent theme about how many
types of abuse out there online and offline actually
occur between uh people that have a, a close
relationship than between strangers.
Exactly. Exactly. And, and, and so privacy is kind
of irrelevant because you trust that person, you share
things with them and, and then, you know, the
relationship goes so, and suddenly they, they, they're really,
uh kind of abusing you online. So,
so, uh another thing that sometimes people worry about
is the negative effects that the use of technology
might have on education. But actually, uh what do
we know about? Perhaps the advantages that, uh, the
lessons Children can take uh from new technologies because
the, there are some. Right.
Yeah. II, I would love to see more research
on that and, and in general on the, um
I think a lot of the debate has focused
on the negative aspects of internet use. You know,
I, I came of age in the, in the
nineties, there was a lot of optimism about, about
the internet. And sometimes I wonder where did all
that go? Now all you hear is like, oh,
the internet is making people depressed, is making people
suicidal, et cetera, et cetera. And, and it's, well,
you know, it has, it still has a lot
of potential. I think it still has an incredible
potential for bringing, bringing people together. Uh AND one
of the ways you can see that quite clearly
is in, in education, um the problem is a
lot of the research has been on educational intervention.
So someone will say, well, you know, we used
a Facebook group in my classroom to teach a
foreign language and, and this sort of thing and
really what I think is lacking is, is an
understanding of the, you know, the basic research of
how uh students uh including both high school students
and, and university students that are really using technology
to help their learning. Because with my other hat,
as a, as a university teacher, I really noticed
that students will use technology in a way that
wasn't really available to me when I was at,
at college. So they will have a whatsapp group
when they have like a group assignment, have a
whatsapp group and they will kind of allocate the
tasks out. And so they're really using technology in
a very organic way to kinda share the knowledge
in their, in their social group and help the
learning. And there's some evidence this may even sort
of flatten out some of the differences in in
attainment. So, you know, the the great majority of
the class is actually reaching a, a kind of
slightly higher level than they would have before before
technology. And they're really just, just AAA lack of
basic research on, on how students are doing that
and and whether it's possible for us to work
with that because we tend to just as, as
university teachers and I'm sure even more as high
school teachers just ignore this kind of back channel
behind the scenes learning that's taken place in the
social groups. And if there's some way that you
could kind of tap into that and kind of
help certain students lead sort of mini groups and
use technology to kind of mentor other students I
think could be really, really interesting. But I've never
really seen any research but just looking into the
the kind of basic social interest because it's so
private, right? A lot, a lot of this social
network use, especially with something like whatsapp is just,
it's just really hidden and, and really difficult together.
So let's talk a little bit about online dating
apps. That's something that people in recent years like.
Yeah, sure. So are there also any important gender
differences here in terms of uh its use?
Yeah. Again, um we're in uh I did a
study myself on Tinder with actually some, it was
driven by some undergraduate students who wanted to do,
like uh we kind of developed a lot of
their, their uh their sort of semester project and
um uh with my, with my long term collaborator,
Antonio Oliveira de Rosa as well, who has been
a really, really good collaborator with me. Um So
we had some evolutionary hypotheses, not all of them
were, were supportive, but um some of them were,
were pretty well supported. So, uh if you look
at um the photos that people are posting on
Tinder, women tended to show off basically their whole
body. So sort of advertising, if you wanna take
a kind of a kind of traditional evolutionary psychology
approach, it's easier to see why they want to
sort of might want to sort of advertise that
sort of aspect of their fitness. Whereas men were
really, were not showing the, I mean, women do
things that use the, the mirror selfies so that
they use a mirror to show their whole body.
Um, MIRROR selfies are quite a, uh, my, my,
my wife actually told me off once for, for
posting on myself. She said no, only girls do
that, only girls and gay men do that basically.
So, you know, it's um it, it, it's, it's
not something that men tend to do if you
look at the sort of photos that men were,
I think tend to be just the face or
um if it was the whole body, it was
with something like cuddling a dog or something, you
know, to show, you know, I have a nice
kind of sensitive
or perhaps more focused on the upper body,
right? Yeah, maybe a bit more on the upper
body but not, you know, so much showing the
body more themselves with something. So for example, with
a nice car or with the Eiffel Tower, you
know, just showing you can think of it as
showing their resources, right? So travel, travel is like,
I've got the resources to go off to another
country and, and take a picture of myself there
or maybe getting a university degree, that sort of
thing. And also they tended to include more text.
So they would have more information about their educational
background. I'm an engineer or their profession, you know,
their, their current job basically. Um, WHAT I'd be
really interested in looking at and there was a
study out a couple of months ago on the
linguistic uh interaction. So I think there's even more
differences once the match has been made, um, there's
a lot of differences between, you know, who's kind
of leading the conversation, that sort of thing and,
and the kind of different linguistic strategies that maybe
the two sides have. But again, this is quite
hidden. So there isn't a lot of a lot
of evidence on them.
Yeah. But uh do we see any changes uh
as young people gain more experience interacting with potential
partners in terms of their behavior in online dating
apps?
I think this is, this is definitely like a
topic for for future research and future research needs
to look at. I think the key question here
is how will the new normal of online dating?
Because there's evidence that it has almost become the
norm and almost the majority of people meet, meet
new romantic partners online and how will it affect
the the process of gaining experience of of gender
partners? Are people going to have more partners on
average before they settle down? I think that would
be quite a reasonable hypothesis, but we, we just
don't know at the moment whether online dating is
going to gonna lead to people taking longer going
through this bigger kind of potential market of, of,
of partners before they settle on a long term
partner. And also there's a question of if you
meet your partner online, does that mean you're more
likely to start looking around when you become dissatisfied
with your partner? Thinking? Well, I met them online.
There were loads of others that I could have
ended up with. So maybe I'll go and take
a look at this. I could end up with
someone better if I if I go back to
the online market. So it's very difficult to answer
those questions because really you need, we, we need
to start looking at and I'm not really aware
of any really long term longitudinal studies in this
area, but that's what you need to really answer
those questions is kind of large scale long term
longitudinal studies which are very costly and, and obviously
time consuming to work out.
But at least at this moment, I mean, when
you hear perhaps some more conservative people claiming that
perhaps uh online dating apps promote hookup culture and
uh short term relationships. I mean, at least as
far as we know, I mean, we don't know
actually. Right. I, I
think, I think it's a reasonable with like with
a lot of these things, I think it's a
reasonable hypothesis, but you can also see the political
reasons they would have for saying that. So sure,
I think, yeah, but so like I tend to
get dissatisfied with people who, who just have a
knee jerk response. So, ah, no, that's crap. You
know, because I, I think they're just responding to
the politics mostly and I think it is a
reasonable hypothesis but actually answering the question would be,
would, would be very time consuming and costly to
do properly.
And so, uh, and there are, there also cultural
and personality differences to consider here.
Um, Again, this is, I think this is one
mostly for it. It's amazing. I mean, there is
a lot of research on online dating, but a
lot of it just seems to be kind of
scratching the surface so you can get, you know,
online dating in Turkey, online dating in the Philippines,
whatever. But there's a little, there, there's very little
which is actually really putting everything together or say
doing a systematic comparison between eight different countries. There
just doesn't seem to be that kind of level
of, of analysis. But you would expect, yeah, there
would be a lot of, a lot of differences
also with personality. Again, I've seen very little in
personality, but you would imagine I would, I would
predict that there would be a lot of personality
differences. A problem there is obviously with self report.
Um It's, if you're dealing with self report, there's
gonna be a lot of bias. A lot of
social presentation bias. When you, when you're talking about
something like online dating, that's why with our study,
we were more just based on analyzing the profiles
and the kind of differences in the profiles because
it, it's a sort of area where, where people
are gonna, gonna really bias their, their presentation of
what they're doing quite a lot, I think.
Well, well, actually one very interesting thing I talked
about. I talked recently with, uh, an evolutionary psychologist
from Brazil and he did work on uh behavior
in online dating apps in Brazil specifically. So I'm
not sure if this would generalize to other countries.
And he told me that at least people uh
online dating app users in Brazil tend to score
higher on socio sexuality than the non users.
Oh yeah. Yeah. Um Yeah, we definitely predict that
uh we did a, did a study with Antonio
on, on socio sexuality as well um on how
people kind of evaluate different faces, but we didn't
kind of get, we didn't really support that there
wasn't much difference basically in socio sexuality. But yeah,
we definitely, and I think our members, I don't
know if it was the same guy that you
were talking about. But I remember a study saying
that showing that Tinder users were more likely to
score score highly on sos I, I think so
because um it's just that you're kind of you're
kind of looking for. Yeah, again, again, this is
maybe sort of short term mating strategy based was
a short term mating strategy isn't it? But then
these days it's not, uh it's not uncommon to
uh to, to, to, you know, meet your, your
wife on Tinder. So it has become much more,
uh much more common.
So, as I said earlier in our first conversation,
we talked a lot about cyberbullying, but just to
perhaps recap uh a little bit what we talked
about back then and perhaps there's also five years
on new information about it. So, in what ways
does it differ from offline bullying? Well, it can
be
um one of the ways that the difference differs
obviously is that you, you can always feel vulnerable
to it. I think that's one of the hardest
aspects to deal with. Uh So if you receive
a message at home where you, you're kind of
used to feeling safe, you know, in your own
bedroom and then suddenly a message pops up on
your phone and you're, you're feeling bad. Th this
can be quite psychologically distressing, but I think they
can feel there's nowhere to get away from it.
Um Another um another uh uh distressing aspect can
be the kind of online uh dog pal kind
of thing where, where you get sort of uh
a lot of people engaging, sort of joining in
piling on the, the bullying and, and that can
be one of the most distressing forms. So for
example, if you have a video that's shared against
someone's will and then it goes viral and even
people who don't know you've never met, you are
kind of mocking you online. I think that can
be, be very distressing, particularly for adolescents who have
this kind of this bias to focus on the
reputation and how other people are, are evaluating them.
They, they're very vulnerable to that. On the other
hand, there is, I've seen evidence that, um, not
everyone agrees that cyber you, the kind of image
that the public image that presented of cyberbullying is
that it's almost worse than, than, than traditional good
old physical bullying. But actually, if you look at
uh, at victims a lot, particularly boys often tend
to say that actually they find physical bullying worse
because you have that uh you have the kind
of physical fear factor. So the bigger boy is
slapping you around the head or whatever, you can
actually almost fear for your life a bit. You
know, how far is this guy gonna go? You
know, and it can be quite, quite intimidating. Whereas,
you know, boys particularly will often take the, the
cyber thing kinda, you know, they'll just ignore it,
just block the person, just ignore the messages. And
then I, I think it depends a lot on,
on the severity. Again, if, if lots of people
are joining in and you feel lots of people
are ganging up on you online, that can maybe
be worse. But if it's just one idiot kind
of sending you stupid messages it's just, you can,
maybe it's not as damaging as people think it
is. So, I think in itself again, you got
to look at the specifics of the act and
in itself it isn't necessarily more or less damaging,
really.
Yeah. But perhaps one of the more complicated things
there would be that it's potentially something that would
go around 24 7. Right. Because, I mean, if
it occurs at school, it only occurs when you're
there but if it's online it can occur anytime.
Yeah, that,
that, that, yeah, like I was saying that that's
definitely, but it, it's kind of swinging some roundabouts
a bit because then you don't have usually at
the same level of a physical threat. I think
one of the, you know, one of the most
sinister things people can do is sometimes sort of
turn the online physicals, I've heard cases of say,
delivering a pizza, uh, or, or delivering other things
to the person or the, um, or what do
they call it? The, the swap where they do
the swatting. So then they actually like, uh, uh,
um, say that they're suspecting someone of a serious
crime and, and the, and the police can actually
send a swat team around and, you know, that,
that, that's when it, it, it, it, you know,
it may be the most sort of serious form
of online or the, or the kind of doxing
where you're like, releasing someone's, uh, you know, with,
with, yeah, not so much with young people, but
you get that with, with old, with adults on,
on Twitter and with, with someone who is sort
of famous or something like that. But um but
yeah, the, the, you know, the, the, the kind,
the kind of making the uh the that sort
of crossing the line between the virtual and physical
maybe can be quite intimidating thinking also maybe like
sort of surveillance photos posting those that sort of
thing. So, you know, that that can be maybe
where it becomes extremely threatening. Yeah.
So on a more positive note, now, what are
some of the benefits and opportunities on the internet
when it comes to intergroup and cross cultural contacts?
Well, I think uh with the, with the kind
of more anonymous forms of communication, text based communication,
there's evidence that can be quite good for promoting
intergroup contact uh in the early stages. Uh BECAUSE
one of the problems, if you, if you kind
of have two groups who've been engaged in conflict,
say, you know, we've got obvious example at the
moment with uh with Jews and, and, and Palestinians
in Israel where, you know, you can imagine at
the moment, it would be be almost impossible to
get them in a room together. And if things
are quite um if things are very uh kind
of sensitive, you can actually get uh an unfortunate
phenomenon when you try and get contact between groups
in the, in the offline world that they can
actually polarize and, and end up actually have a
big argument and, and they come away almost. Uh
THERE have been examples of workshops like that where
they, the groups unfortunately came away almost more polarized
than they were before punta. So one, there is
evidence that sometimes having the initial contact online because
it kind of removes the uh the kind of
salience of the cultural differences. You know, you don't
see the immediate visual difference that someone is wearing
different clothes, different hairstyle or whatever. Uh And you
can just kind of talk about the things that
connect you. So you kind of have, I guess
it's a bit like the sort of interactions and
online dating where you have the hyper personalization where
you tend to sort of see the positive aspects.
So you can actually get that bias with the
intergroup communication as well. Um But I would say
you probably do need to have physical to get
a really true and group contact, you would need
to have still need to have physical contact at
some point. Uh And I think it would be
interesting to think about um the use of video
uh video chat as a kind of halfway house.
So you could kind of start with text based
contact, then move to kind of having people have
a big zoom meeting or something before you actually
bring them together and, and, and, and that could
be a way of ensuring that the physical contact
is kind of safer because they've had all this
interaction by text and video beforehand.
So another thing now that I think is very
interesting from a psychological perspective is do we know
in what ways interpersonal interactions online differ from offline
interactions? And, and I mean, if there are differences,
do you think that for example, when certain people
worry that if someone spends too much time on
the internet, even if they are interacting with other
people on social gaming, for example, that that might
damage their social skills because they are not interacting
face to face. For example, I think that's become
less of a concern as the interactions become more
immersive. So these days, we have to, you have
to really distinguishing text based audio video communication. Um
I really think, you know, it's not all the
same thing. Uh And, and a lot of the
classic studies from the early days of cyber psychology
can almost seem a bit out of date because
they focused on text based online communication. So they
say, you know, it's more anonymous, it's more asynchronous,
particularly the asynchrony now doesn't seem much of a
factor uh at all because, you know, we're all
used to like immediate responses by whatsapp video calls.
So this idea that um you had theories like
reduced cues theory, uh hyper personalization, which I think
don't apply nearly as much to, to video based
uh communication. So I think before you jump to
conclusions about the effects, you should sort of see
how someone is usually interacting online. If they're doing
it in a text based way, then you might
still have concerns about the social skills, about the
idealization of the people they meet online, et cetera.
But uh I noticed, for example, uh when, when
my sons are playing uh you know, games like
valorant or Overwatch, they usually communicating by voice. And
they, you know, it seems to me that that
is could be pretty uh pretty useful as actually
a way of kind of learning to work in
a group, learning to develop a strategy together. It's
not some, not the kind of experience that I
had as a as a teenager and it might
have been quite useful for me in terms of
developing my social skills if I was able to,
to look at working in a team like that.
So it's not at all the case that online
people cannot develop their social skills, right? They, they
can at least in certain context.
Yeah, I mean, again, I think as, as in
a lot of these areas, the hard evidence is
really lacking. But I think potentially um you know,
it, it it's maybe not, not to the same
extent as if they're regularly playing in a football
team, but it's very different from, from the kind
of image how, how people, how teenage boys do
gaming these days, I think is very different from
the traditional image of a nerd kind of sitting
in the basement. I think there's a lot more
social act interaction than, than older people might realize
going on.
And so uh I think that you, you've already
sort of answered this earlier, but uh looking at
most of the risks that people tend to associate
with the internet technologies. Do you think that overall
they are exaggerated or
not? I think it depends uh on uh on
the group. I mean, just by the general public,
I would say, yeah, probably there is some exaggeration.
Um YOU know, just iiii I sometimes have slight
arguments with my wife about her daughter's screen news.
She's like, I don't know, she's like stuck at
her phone all the time and it's like, well,
so are we, you know, so it, it seems
straight. Why do people worry so much about again?
It's this kind of protection of overprotection of Children
thinking about them as particularly vulnerable to these cultural
influences, I think, which is quite natural. But why
are particularly worried about Children and adolescents and they're
not worried about adults using cell phones all the
time, you know. So it, it, I think it
is, it is the new normal and, and you
know, it's not going away. So I think there
is an exaggeration of, of the risk by older
generations. But in terms of some of the scientists,
I think, do downplay the risks, maybe a bit
more than, than they should do. Uh ESPECIALLY in
more informal communications, as I was saying, like on,
on Twitter and so on. And um especially policy,
I would like to see more attention being paid
by policymakers and in terms of not just leaving
everything to the market, but actually thinking, you know,
how can we influence without destroying people's freedom of
speech? But how can we maybe kind of nudge
or, or tilt the kind of online experience so
that it is a bit more positive for people.
And I think there is people are starting to
look at an example would be the five rights
foundation uh Sonia Livingstone, uh professor at LSE in
London. Um It's been really involved in setting that
up and they're really like pressuring governments to kind
of work with the industry to kind of create
a safer environment for kids online. But they uh
yeah, there, there, there needs to be more of
that. I think more, more governments really trying to
trying to influence the experience that kids are having
online.
Uh And with the goal of in mind of
financing adolescents, well being, what would you say are
perhaps some of the messages guidelines that people should
take from your book when it comes to communicating
about potential online risks, identifying, for example, at risk
individuals and so on.
I think, I think it's difficult because as I
was saying, adolescents often do, um, they kind of
withdraw from their parents. But I think this is
quite natural and you don't as a parent, you
know, I've got a 20 year old, uh, and
an 18 year old as well as a six
year old and, and I don't know, I can't
honestly say I've had, you know, I'm vaguely aware
of what my sons do online but I haven't
had many kind of in depth conversations. So I
have to hold my hand up and, and, and
admit that, but I think you need try and
be aware of, you know, what sort of, you
know, I know what games they like, we have
conversations about that sort of thing. Um So try
and be aware of, you know, what sort of
things they're into online. At least I do think
though. But as I was saying, I, I think
a lot of responsibilities is put on to parents
and, and this is maybe this kind of individualistic
Western society kind of thing. We, we obviously don't
want to go all the way to kind of
China model totally controlling people's internet life. But I
do one of the things I suggest um at
the end of the book is to do with
algorithms, you know, the the companies like Meta and
Google use all these algorithms to kind of control
what they're showing to us. But it's very much
just sort of market driven driven by advertisers, sponsored
content and so on. I think they could be
doing more and I think they are starting to
do this but they could be doing more with
algorithms to actually make the internet a bit of
a safer environment. I'm very surprised sometimes when I,
when my daughter, my six year old daughter is
watching youtube and some of the things that pop
up in recommendations that's not appropriate for a six
year old kid to be watching. You know, and
so, you know, surely we have enough sophisticated, enough
algorithms these days. It can be pretty obvious when
I look at her youtube history, it's pretty obvious
that it's a, a six year old girl's youtube
history, right? So they could be doing a better
job I think of, you know, not, not recommending
them videos which are, which are really not appropriate
for, for that age group. And, and II, I
think they do, there's a bit of kind of
holding up their hands, you know, freedom of freedom
of speech. You know, we're not gonna control what,
what people view, but they could be a bit
more proactive about creating a safer experience for kids.
I think maybe applies more to younger kids than
a adolescents. But also, um, you know, if you
think about things like, uh, extreme pornography and so
on, they could probably be restricting those from adolescence
as well, quite more productively.
Yeah. And do you think that knowledge about, uh,
adolescents use of internet technologies could also apply in
a clinical context. And if so how
well I'm not a clinician. So it's hard to,
hard to answer that, I think. Um, YEAH, I
mean, I, I do think uh it could help
in terms of just not, like I said, some
psychiatrists maybe take a, a bit of a knee
jerk response. Oh, you know, it can't be good
that, that, that adolescents are spending all the time
on the cell phone and not engaging with, you
know, offline personal relationships with their families. But like
I say, it's been, it's always been a natural
feature of adolescence. So you tend to withdraw from
your family, spend a lot of time up in
your bedroom, you know, and, and I think the
cell phone is just a kind of modern version
of that really. So I don't think it's intrinsically
bad. I think um what, what maybe reading the
book could give them would be an understanding of
what kinds of usage might be particularly damaging to
adolescents because of the particular vulnerabilities in the sex.
The chapter on relationships. I talk about them learning
about new sexual relationships and that sort of thing
and, and how there could be particular risks uh
for certain groups and that the same thing with
um body image eating disorders and so on. So
there are particular vulnerabilities associated with particular types of
usage. But again, it's, it would be very much
I would stress the importance of working on a
case by case basis, looking at the overall social
context of the person.
So one last question, then do you have any
ideas about how internet use might change in the
future? And if so where do you think this
change might stem from? I mean, would it be
from, for example, people becoming more aware of how
they use the internet and perhaps the more positive
and negative ways they can do it and perhaps
becoming a little bit more literate about it.
Um, MAYBE, I think, I think you can see
with any new technology when people start, when people
first use it, there's a kind of lack of
norms and, uh you know, there's a time when
people, it takes time for people to, to work
out. I, I think I've seen it's a bit
anecdotal but, you know, people always complain about uh
the amount of kind of trash talking that takes
place on Twitter and, and youtube and so on.
I have to say my impression is that that
that's, and it would be really fascinating to look
at, you know, the historical records and look at
it over time. But I think it's actually gets
a bit, it's got a bit less frequent over
time as people, it always sticks in people's minds,
right. So they, they just notice it and think
that it's happening more. But I, I think that
gradually people adapt and, and kind of develop norms
for kind of etiquette really for, for kind of
influencing these interactions um in, in terms of other
things that are changing, I think. Uh IT was
uh a bit embarrassing to me that Chat G
BT came out just as my book was being
published because there's nothing in there about A I
at all, basically a little bit of algorithms in
the conclusion. But um obviously, if I was writing
it now, I would spend a lot of time
talking about chat G BT, especially in educational contexts,
how that's gonna gonna change things. Um So that
would be a big area where I think um
it's gonna have really far reaching changes in how
people uh interact online and offline even as well
probably. Um And in terms of video communication, I
think that's something that's less heralded, heralded, heralded than
A I, but it's becoming so much more the
norm just to have video based interactions, especially with
young people. And um I think, uh for example,
in Vietnam, they, they don't use whatsapp so much.
There's another tool they have here called Zalu, which
is actually more based, I think it's quite common
in other countries in Southeast Asia, um which is
more based on video communication. So it's, I think
eventually you could see how it might almost replace
chatting quite a lot. And I think that could
have quite far reaching effects on uh on how,
how uh how, how we're actually engaging in, in
interactions. Uh They can feel more, real, less kind
of a technological interaction and more like a normal
natural kind of interaction. Uh I think from the
point of view of education as well, um, it's
a little bit worrying because you do sort of
wonder if, if reading is eventually going to disappear
because ST students very much, you know, are, are,
um, they, they're kind of, uh, they're keen to
just watch videos. Right. Well, it's good for you
for people like you, I suppose they keen to
watch videos instead of, instead of reading articles. Um,
AND also they will use, uh, you know, something
like chat G BT, something called Chat Beat PDF
where you feed it an article. Uh AND it'll
like just, it'll answer the questions that you have
about the article. So I, I do, it's not
inconceivable but literacy rates could actually go down. And
if you're looking at sort of 100 years in
the future as, as people just get used to
kind of doing everything by video and you sort
of think, well, what effects will that on society?
Like I talked about the, the printing press, it
could be very, very similar kind of level of
effects on society, I think
actually something that I've heard about recently is that
some people fear that young people will also lose
their handwriting skills because they no longer write by
hand.
Yeah. And I noticed in my, in my, in
my daughter's school they told her like proper handwriting.
And it seemed to me actually that made it
more difficult for her to learn the letters and
things than if they just because right from the
beginning, sort of age five or six, they're teaching
them proper 100 it just, just traditional, it's a
traditional Catholic school. That's what the way they do
things. But you'd think it would be kind of
easier just to learn on a keyboard just because
she's so used to kind of like seeing, seeing
words on the, on the smartphone. But yeah, it's
so and then you've got the reverse flynn effect,
right? That you must have heard of that where
um so it seems like the the IQ games
in most of the 20th century are actually going
into reverse and kind of controversial to blame that
on smartphones. But you do, you do wonder what
else exactly would have, would have caused it if
it wasn't this, this kind of not needing to
depend on writing so much because you've actually got
um got more direct ways of communicating with
people. So I guess that uh let's see how
things go. And now with a I particularly it's
sort of a brave new world, right? OK. So
the book is again, adolescent use of new media
and internet technologies, debating risks and opportunities in the
digital age. And I'm leaving a link to it
in the description of the interview. And Dr Ingram,
apart from the book, would you like to tell
people where they can find you when your work
on the internet?
Um, OH, I was, I didn't really expect it.
I mean, if you go to my Google Scholar
page, I don't know if you can link to
that or if
you, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I can, I
can if you search for Gordon in room, uh,
Los Andes, uh it should, it should come up.
So, but yeah, I've got all my articles on
uh on Google on the Google Scholar page.
Ok, great. So thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. As
I said at the beginning, I really loved the
book. So it was really fun to talk to
you about it. Thank you. Thanks
a lot. Very nice to be to have you
on the record and uh I look forward to
catching up with some of your other interviews. Thank
you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com. And also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno.
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger and H her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson, Yaar, Roman Roach Diego and Jan
Punter Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba Adam Hunt, Pavlo
Stassi Na Me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and
YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broder Douglas
Fry Franka La Gilon Cortez or Scott Zachary. Ftw
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loi Georgio
Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Oin David Williams Di
A Costa, Anton Erickson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior, old Ebon,
Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn,
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas
Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert
Jessica. No week in the Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sea Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers, these our web, Jim
Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin
John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick. Golden and
to my executive producers, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.